---
date: 2025-05-09 21:41:00 +08:00
layout: post
title: Dissecting "Brain rot" -- More Than Just a Meme?
subtitle: By Willow
description: An inquiry paper about the notorious Gen Alpha phenomenon
image: https://buzz.nayag.com/wp-content/uploads/2023/07/Skibidi-Toilet-Wiki.jpg.webp
category: blog
tags:
  - social-issues
  - meme
  - fun
author: willow
paginate: true
---

*[Image from Buzz Nayag] Un-cut and un-edited draft of a university requirement (passed April 22, 2025 and graded May 2, 2025), with added hyperlinks for the memes. Uploaded as requested by co-whiskee-ers. As expected, the language of this one may be too academic for a blog haha*

<br>

In 2024, Oxford declared “brain rot” as the word of the year (Oxford University Press, 2024). It is defined as “the supposed deterioration of a person’s mental or intellectual state, especially viewed as the result of overconsumption of material (now particularly online content) considered to be trivial or unchallenging. Also: something characterized as likely to lead to such deterioration” (ibid). The meaning of it should be clear just by seeing the word: a combination of the words “brain” and “rot”. But it’s thrown around in many different ways. Used by kids trying to act cool, used by young “Tiktokers” as jokes, and used by worried adults pointing out the supposed dangers of such content. Aside from what it embodies, it’s important to assess brain rot’s impact on society, both online and offline, and both in the present and in the future. What exactly is “brain rot” as Oxford University Press (2024) defined it, and what are its implications? Sometimes, internet “memes” are more than just memes.

“Brain rot” is not really a new term – its first recorded usage dates back to as early as 1854, with Henry David Thoreau using the term to describe “society’s tendency to devalue complex ideas … indicative of a general decline in mental and intellectual effort” (Oxford University Press, 2024). However, the term’s popularity and modern meaning began in the 21st century, steadily rising since 2004 before reaching virality in the 2020’s (Prema, 2024). Through centuries, the meaning of “brain rot” seems to stay the same. What changes is what “brain rot” embodies, the first part of Oxford University Press’s (2024) definition of “brain rot” – what exactly are the things that supposedly rots our brains today?

<a href="https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PL-ZXraMeHBPJHXBhrNowJaQslyqtUg-tZ">Skibidi Toilet</a>, a web series on Youtube, is perhaps the most iconic brain rot meme to date. In fact, the show is almost synonymous with “brain rot”, and is probably the first viral meme labelled as such. The show features peculiar toilet creatures with human heads fighting electronic devices with human bodies. This absurd, crude, and at times unsettling show was a hit, especially towards younger audiences as Lorenz (2023) documented. It is in fact, easy to dismiss it as “cringe” – something embarrassingly bad or low quality. However, Lorenz (2023) further revealed testimonies about the series’s complex narrative and skillful production, as well as an avid online community of people creating games, arts, written works, and discussions breaking down its rich “lore” or story. These characteristics make Skibidi Toilet not as “shallow” as someone might think. Is it supposedly “rotting” the brain if it fuels young people’s creativity?

Of course just because it’s supposedly complex or inspiring doesn’t mean that it has brain rotting capabilities, especially towards young audiences. There was a usual talk of its unsettling and violent imagery, as highlighted by Bumas (2014), describing the violence as “unrelenting and large in scope”. However, he clarified that it “never goes beyond cartoonish explosions and punches” (ibid). Aside from Bumas, other news articles consulted also dismissed the worries about the supposed dangers of the series to children. Going back to Lorenz (2023), she referred to it as “harmless entertainment” akin to Cocomelon. Harmon (2024) described the worries, culminating in the catchphrase “Skibidi Toilet Syndrome” as “moral panic”. Harmon discussed parents’ children being “obsessed” and showing concerning behavior being so viral that it alerted the Russian authorities, leading to some memes being illegal in the country (ibid). Phillip Hamilton, an associate editor at a website called Know Your Meme said that the supposed dangers are “just the obsessive, seemingly addictive aspect” (Bumas, 2024).

Despite all these, Skibidi Toilet rose to popularity and revolutionized internet meme culture. Since then, memes categorized as “brain rot” started streaming in social media platforms, most notably Tiktok, an app popular with today’s young people (Cervi, 2021). I gathered many from personal experience alone. <a href="https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=EHKCJyEb1uA">“Gegagedigedagedago” meme</a> features a nugget with a face singing “Cotton Eyed Joe” by Rednex. <a href="https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JYDvFQp3ToQ">“Rat dance” meme</a> features an animated rat dancing to the song "Chess Type Beat" by Joyful. While <a href="https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zY604DGFBhs">“Italian Brainrot”</a> is a more recent one featuring surreal AI generated photos of animals with a computer voiceover of a random Italian text. Similar trends of surreal images with random voiceovers also appeared in the past. A personal favorite, <a href="https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZHgyQGoeaB0">“Oo Ee A E A Cat” meme</a>, features an animation of a cat spinning to some random tune that loosely sounds like “oo ee ee a ee”.

With such surreal and non-sense humor, it’s easy to see why these would be considered brain rot memes. But like Skibidi Toilet, some of these memes can usher unexpected trends filled with creativity and expression. “Rat dance” meme showered Tiktok’s animation community – a community filled with artists of all ages and skill levels – with <a href="https://www.tiktok.com/music/original-sound-%E2%8B%86%C2%B0%E0%BF%94-%F0%9D%90%80%F0%9D%90%AF%F0%9D%90%A2%F0%9D%90%B1%F0%9D%90%B1-%DB%B6%E0%A7%8E-4%F0%9D%90%8A-%F0%9D%9C%97%F0%9D%9C%9A%C2%B0%E2%8B%86-7463981834297805584?lang=en">animations</a> of their take on the “rat dance” animation. This is separate from the actual <a href="https://www.tiktok.com/music/som-original-ratomilton-7459480892824587013?lang=en">dance trend</a> that it started featuring dancers. “Oo Ee A E A Cat” meme turned into some kind of a <a href="https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLS4FHTmjATC4xnxwY0G7V7_7FjJbwEafw">remix challenge</a> where the iconic sound is remixed into various songs, paired with matching animation of the cat in the meme.

Seemingly, what makes brain rot memes “brain rot” is not really the fact that it can literally impair the viewer’s cognitive abilities but merely its surreality and nonsensical nature. Press-Reynolds (2024) referred to these internet snippets as “surreal gibberish”  instigated by what he called “brainrot humour” rising in the online world. Even if it set fire to creative trends, “rat dance” is just that, a rat dancing. The spinning cat is just that, a spinning cat. But there is another defining thing that makes brain rot brain rot: their audience.

Britannica defines Generation Alpha or Gen Alpha as people born roughly between 2010 and 2025 (Eldridge, 2025). Gen Alpha is highly associated with brain rot (Press-Reynolds, 2023). This makes brain rot a cultural movement. The first big step in making an impact in the online world. Arguably, it is the most defining thing of brain rot memes.

Surreal memes or surreal humor in general are not new. In fact, as Press-Reynolds (2024) mentioned, the creator of Skibidi Toilet is actually a Gen Z. In another article, he (Press-Reynolds, 2023) documented some Gen Z memes possessing brain rot characteristics, although he did not elaborate it much. From personal experience, the most iconic Gen Z memes with surreality and nonsense humor are the <a href="https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2yJgwwDcgV8">“Nyan cat” meme</a> featuring an animation of a cat singing a Japanese song, <a href="https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jofNR_WkoCE">“The Fox” song</a> by Ylvis, and <a href="https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Ct6BUPvE2sM">“PPAP (Pen-Pineapple-Apple-Pen)” song</a> by Pikotaro. Even older generations had memes that younger people recognize, such as the song <a href="https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=k85mRPqvMbE">“Axel F”</a> by Crazy Frog and the <a href="https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-5x5OXfe9KY">“Dancing Baby” meme</a> which dates back to as far as 1996. Apparently, a person can be brain rotted by three generations! But again, Gen Alpha’s memes still remain as the brain rot memes solely for being Gen Alpha.

Apart from memes and internet media, slangs can also be described as brain rot. Rachmijati and Cahyati (2024) defined “brain rot” as Gen Alpha’s very own slang. Just like in the case of brain rot memes, brain rot slangs are also brain rot because they’re from Gen Alpha. Just like memes, these linguistic wonders are manifestations of Gen Alpha’s rising influence in the stage of internet culture. Rachmijati and Cahyati (2024) mentioned that it’s another unique form of expression by a generation created as language evolved with technology. Hailing their “creativity and flexibility”, they documented several terms and described most of them as “fresh and creative slang”, a self-explanatory category they created for such terms (ibid). With such unique and sometimes complex origins of these terms, often tied to some meme or cultural references, it’s easy to dismiss them as random nonsense. To fully understand the word “sigma” for example, one has to be familiar with the “alpha male” myth and how it was turned into a meme. To appreciate the puzzling term, “fanum tax”, one has to be in tune with a running gag of Twitch streamer, Fanum. Other terms like the 2023 Oxford word of the year “rizz” (Oxford University Press, 2023) have an even more spontaneous appearance that their origin seemed irrelevant. Derived from “charisma”, it’s a peculiar term that works as a noun and a verb. 

Just like memes, this slang is a manifestation of Gen Alpha’s rising cultural influence. It puzzles other generations, and it is created spontaneously and oftentimes creatively. These characteristics are not limited to Gen Alpha slangs. Other generations’ slangs also have interestingly created slangs. Perhaps the unique circumstances surrounding Gen Alpha is the internet and social media, allowing for memes and slangs rising quickly to virality as well as communities and like-minded people to gather together and form subcultures. The internet and social media also pose unique challenges that Gen Alpha adapts to. Automated censorship, for example, gave rise to new terms for concepts social media would censor if said explicitly. Steen, Yurechko, and Klug (2023) documented the usage of algospeak on Tiktok to avoid censorship, which is done by a moderation algorithm with issues of non-contextuality, randomness, inaccuracy, and bias. Utilizing both letters, symbols, and even emojis, these terms circulated on the social media app. Some terms are obvious, such as “bl00d” or “unalive” – a term for death or killing. Some are more puzzling, such as “le dollar bean” meaning lesbian and “sewer slide” meaning suicide. Of course this phenomenon is not new, nor is it limited to Gen Alpha. In fact, Steen, Yurechko, and Klug (2023) further compared it to “Textspeak” during the era of SMS and “Lolspeak” during the rise of cat memes on the internet. These are basically the natural drive of people to linguistically navigate their environment, influenced by the geographical, socio-cultural, and political aspects of it (ibid).

So far, one can conclude that “brain rot” encompasses Gen Alpha’s culture, particularly online. The first part of the Oxford University Press (2024) definition, therefore, embodies this. This is what is popularly accepted as the cause of the “brain rot” phenomenon. The second part of the Oxford University Press (2024) definition – the effects – is arguably more important to focus on. Brain rot as literal degradation of cognitive functions does not sound as fun as internet memes. So it is important to clarify how real the concerns surrounding it are.

There are studies investigating the “brain rot” phenomenon with utmost wariness. It is defined by Kukreja, Chawla, and Sagar (2025) as  “urgent concerns” regarding technology’s effect on mental health. Defining it similarly, Al Husaini (2025) called it a “significant threat to human resource quality”, while Yazgan (2025) even called it the “problem of the century”.

Al Husaini (2025) analysed literature to investigate the supposed negative impact of brain rot. He linked the rise of the term to the increasing prevalence of social media (ibid). It is an observable fact that social media just continues to be more popular, encompassing individuals of all ages. Generation Z and Generation Alpha are the ones who lived in the increasingly digital world. As gathered by Mai (2023), social media users amount to about 4.75 billion in 2022. In the same year, there were about 6.92 billion smartphone users (ibid). Among Gen Alpha, who can use the tablet before the age of 4, 61% already own a tablet, while 49% already own a smartphone; for Gen Z, about 98% owns a smartphone (ibid). At this point, from a personal perspective, it’s difficult to think of living without a smartphone. From senior citizens communicating with their OFW (overseas Filipino worker) sons to 9 year olds needing Facebook to promote their science project, almost everyone else uses it too. It’s certainly a big part of a Gen Z or Gen Alpha person’s social life. A social media account is almost required for every Gen Z. Gen Alpha children are starting to catch up, with children as young as 9 having an account despite being unallowed by the platforms. Younger children are still exposed to social media via “challenges” or social media posts made by their parents. Watching Youtube videos frequently is becoming alarmingly common with babies as well, with channels such as the nursery rhyme channel Cocomelon and the educational channel Ms Rachel dedicated for such audiences, both having millions of subscribers in 2025.

Going back to Al Husaini (2025), findings show digital activities and social media having negative impacts on self-control abilities in decision-making, impulse control, and planning. Furthermore, such activities are also linked to mental health issues such as depression, anxiety, insomnia, and attention disorders. Findings regarding physical brain rot – the structure of the brain – are mixed, making the conversation on literal brain rot debatable. Still, these findings still fit the definition of the brain rot phenomenon. Similar findings are gathered from clinical research by Yazgan (2025), the one who called it the “problem of the century”. He highlighted the addiction caused by social media, leading to negative effects to brain development. Similar to Al Husaini (2025), he specifically enumerated insomnia, memory impairment, stress, anxiety, depression, and reduced attention. Yousef, Alshamy, Tlili, and Metwally, (2025) also had similar results after examining research from 2023 to 2024, linking social media behaviors such as “doom scrolling” and addiction to psychological distress, anxiety, and depression. Such factors also impair executive functioning skills, including memory, planning, and decision-making” (ibid). They furthermore identified “emotional desensitization, cognitive overload, and a negative self-concept” as effects of brain rot.

It’s clearly a concern, especially for younger people. As earlier mentioned, Gen Z and Gen Alpha are raised in the digital age, making them more vulnerable to the phenomenon. Referred to as “digital natives” by Loh and Kanai (2015), these people gravitate towards “a shallow mode of learning characterized by quick scanning, reduced contemplation, and memory consolidation”, culminating in a “shift” to such mode of learning. Notably, these qualities are reminiscent of brain rot contents, especially considering that it was from 2015. In fact, Kukreja, Chawla, and Sagar (2025) cited it in their letter to a psychiatry journal editor, tackling concerns about brain rot and its effects on young people.  Digital natives also have cognitive profiles marked by rapid attention shifting, multitasking, increased distractibility, and poor executive control abilities (Loh and Kanai, 2015). Furthermore, these people are easily distracted, have poor executive control abilities, and have a higher prevalence of “internet-related addictive behaviors” (ibid). In the rather alarming findings of Manwell, Tadros, Ciccarelli, and Eikelboom (2022), also cited in the aforementioned letter, excessive screen time is linked to effects reminiscent of dementia. They also asserted that excessive screen time also “alters gray matter and white volumes in the brain, increasing the risk of mental disorders” – a possible “yes” to the literal/physical brain rot debate.

The growth of Tiktok, especially among younger users, is a testament to the effectiveness of its model and personalization algorithm (Cervi, 2021). This algorithm facilitates addictive online behavior, negatively affecting concentration and attention span (Mattson, 2024). Tiktok’s model is arguably revolutionary too, employing an endless, personalized stream of short videos of about 15-30 seconds. This model is so effective it is copied by other social media, such as Youtube with its “Shorts” and Facebook with its “Reels”, both started in 2019. It is no surprise that social media is designed to keep people hooked.

Sometimes, memes are more than just memes. Brain rot encompasses two things, as defined by Oxford University Press (2024): the seemingly shallow online content made by Gen Alpha (“brain rot content”) and the effect of excessive online behaviors on cognitive and mental health (“brain rot phenomenon”). The two are quite different, and it’s tempting to connect the two, probably as cause and effect. However, as discussed earlier, the first definition is an unfair definition that ties brain rot content to the fact that they’re Gen Alpha. This ignores the brain rot qualities of other generations’ online content, as well as the creative and cultural aspects of Gen Alpha’s online content. The second definition poses a more serious fact, the “not just meme” part of the meme – the truth behind the jokes. As discussed earlier, there is substantial evidence that it is indeed “that damn phone”. The brain rot phenomenon among the youth is a real problem, and it should be addressed accordingly. More generations will grow up in a digital world where technological advancements never stop and where children’s mental health are sacrificed for profit. Adapting to this increasingly complex world as a society is therefore important. The prevalence of the term “brain rot” may be a manifestation of these genuine concerns. However, it seems like everyone is focused on this seemingly generational ire regarding the quality and depth of Gen Alpha’s brain rot content, with many linking it to brain rot phenomenon itself. Most of us are focused on the meme itself. The comically surreal content of Gen Alpha is almost a red herring relative to the actual concerns regarding brain rot phenomenon. Spinning cats and toilet heads are silly, but pointing at them and then pointing at the rising mental health crisis among the youth is probably sillier.

<br>

> **I can't believe I made a "blog" with a "references" section but here we are:**
  <br> - Al Husaini (2025). Brain Rot and National Resilience: A Review of Digital Threats to Human Resource Quality and National Stability in the Global Information Age. MultiCore: Journal of Multidisciplinary Research and Innovation, 1(2).
  <br> - Bumas, A. (2024, June 10). Who’s Afraid of Skibidi Toilet? Wired. 
  <br> - Cervi, L. (2021). Tik Tok and generation Z. Theatre, Dance and Performance Training, 12(2), 198–204.
  <br> - Eldridge, S. (2025, February 7). Generation Alpha. Britannica. 
  <br> - Harmon, S. (2024, January 22). Skibidi Toilet: what is this bizarre viral YouTube series – and does it deserve the moral panic? The Guardian.
  <br> - Kukreja, S., Chawla, N., & Sagar, R. (2025). ‘Brain rot’ – More than just a passing linguistic trend. Asian Journal of Psychiatry, 106.
  <br> - Loh KK, Kanai R. How Has the Internet Reshaped Human Cognition? The Neuroscientist, 22(5), 506-520.
  <br> - Lorenz, T. (2023, December 10). How a toilet-themed YouTube series became the biggest thing online. 
  <br> - Mai, Q. H. (2023). Considering different aspects of digital and social media marketing to attract generation Z and Alpha as the primary customer.
  <br> - Manwell, L., Tadros, M., Ciccarelli, T., & Eikelboom, R. (2022). Digital dementia in the internet generation: excessive screen time during brain development will increase the risk of Alzheimer's disease and related dementias in adulthood. Journal of Integrated Neuroscience, 21(1), 28.
  <br> - Mattson, A. (2024, January 10). Sludge Videos Are Taking Over TikTok-And People’s Mind. Scientific American.
  <br> - Oxford University Press (2024, December 2). ‘Brain rot’ named Oxford Word of the Year 2024.
  <br> - Oxford University Press (2023, December 4). Rizz crowned Oxford Word of the Year 2023.
  <br> - Press-Reynolds, K. (2023, December 5). While some are making fun of Gen Alpha's 'brainrot' memes, Gen Zers are reminding each other of the ridiculous memes they grew up with. Business Insider.
  <br> - Press-Reynolds, K. (2024, June 25). How brainrot humour infected the internet with surreal gibberish. Dazed.
  <br> - Prima, S. (2024, February 8). What is 'brain rot'? Do you have it? SBS News.
  <br> - Rachmijati, C. &Cahyati S.S. (2024). Know Your Skibidi: Navigating Gen Alpha’s Slang Types and
  Trend on Social Media X. In International Conference On Research And Development (ICORAD), 3(2), 392-400.
  <br> - Steen, E., Yurechko, K., & Klug, D. (2023). You can (not) say what you want: Using algospeak to contest and evade algorithmic content moderation on TikTok. Social Media+ Society, 9(3).
  <br> - Yazgan, A. M. (2025). The Problem of the Century: Brain Rot. OPUS– Journal of Society Research, 22(2), 211-221.
  <br> - Yousef, A. M. F., Alshamy, A., Tlili, A., & Metwally, A. H. S. (2025). Demystifying the New Dilemma of Brain Rot in the Digital Era: A Review. Brain Sciences, 15(3), 283.


<br>